arch: add ysql gin design doc (#9002)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: architecture/design/ysql-gin-indexes.md

# YSQL GIN indexes

> As of v2.6/v2.7, Yugabyte supports only one type of index access method for DocDB-backed relations: `lsm`.  This simply maps columns to the primary key of the base table.

Reviewer: Suggestion: 
As of v2.6 and v2.7

> As of v2.6/v2.7, Yugabyte supports only one type of index access method for DocDB-backed relations: `lsm`.  This simply maps columns to the primary key of the base table.

Reviewer 2: And just do a global search and replace for `.  ` (dot space space) and replace with a single space after the period `. `

> Generalized inverted indexes map elements inside container columns to the pk of the base table.  To support GIN, we add a new access method `ybgin` and implement the access method api.  A lot of the work can be borrowed from upstream postgres's `gin` access method.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
change pk to primary key

Reviewer: Extra spaces in "... table.  To support..."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generalized inverted indexes map elements inside container columns to the primary key of the base table. To support GIN, we add a new access method `ybgin` and implement the access method API.  A lot of the work can be borrowed from the upstream PostgreSQL `gin` access method.
```

> Generalized inverted indexes map elements inside container columns to the pk of the base table.  To support GIN, we add a new access method `ybgin` and implement the access method api.  A lot of the work can be borrowed from upstream postgres's `gin` access method.

Reviewer: "we" should not be used in tech documentation.
Suggestion:
To support GIN, a new access method `ybgin` has been  added and the access method API implemented.

Reviewer 2: Except that this is instructions for implementation, and not documentation... We is OK here, as it's Yugabyte talking to Yugabyte :)

> Generalized inverted indexes map elements inside container columns to the pk of the base table.  To support GIN, we add a new access method `ybgin` and implement the access method api.  A lot of the work can be borrowed from upstream postgres's `gin` access method.

Reviewer 2: Global change: API instead of api

## opclasses

> Upstream postgres comes with the following [`gin` opclasses][opclasses]:

Reviewer 2: Another global change: Postgres should be PostgreSQL

```suggestion
Upstream PostgreSQL comes with the following [`gin` opclasses][opclasses]:
```

- `tsvector_ops`: map `tsvector` to `text`
- `array_ops`: map `anyarray` to `anyelement`
- `jsonb_ops`: map `jsonb` to `text` (key or value in jsonb)
- `jsonb_path_ops`: map `jsonb` to `int4` (hash of root-to-leaf path in jsonb)

> We can just duplicate these for the `ybgin` access method and reference the same opfamily.

Reviewer: "We" shouldn't be  used

[opclasses]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/gin-builtin-opclasses.html

## amapi

> ### build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Build
```

> `ambuild` and `yb_ambackfill` are used for `CREATE INDEX` with and without online schema changes.  They both read from the base table and insert to the index table.  Therefore, this is a superset of `yb_aminsert`.  There's not much else to it.

Reviewer: Extra space in "changes.  They both"

> `ambuild` and `yb_ambackfill` are used for `CREATE INDEX` with and without online schema changes.  They both read from the base table and insert to the index table.  Therefore, this is a superset of `yb_aminsert`.  There's not much else to it.

Reviewer: Extra space in "table.  Therefore"

> `ambuild` and `yb_ambackfill` are used for `CREATE INDEX` with and without online schema changes.  They both read from the base table and insert to the index table.  Therefore, this is a superset of `yb_aminsert`.  There's not much else to it.

Reviewer: "There's not much else to it." should be deleted.

Author: It conveys additional information that, although it's a superset, it doesn't contain much else that should be noted here.

> `ambuild` and `yb_ambackfill` are used for `CREATE INDEX` with and without online schema changes.  They both read from the base table and insert to the index table.  Therefore, this is a superset of `yb_aminsert`.  There's not much else to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ambuild` and `yb_ambackfill` are used for `CREATE INDEX` with and without online schema changes.  They both read from the base table and insert to the index table.  Therefore, this is a superset of `yb_aminsert`.
```

> ### insert

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Insert
```

> `yb_aminsert` is used instead of `aminsert` for Yugabyte.  To support index writes, extract the scan entries (reuse code from upstream) for each item and write

Reviewer: Extra space in "Yugabyte.  To support"

> `yb_aminsert` is used instead of `aminsert` for Yugabyte.  To support index writes, extract the scan entries (reuse code from upstream) for each item and write

Reviewer: Period is missing after "write"

Author: The sentence does not end there.

    [scan entry, basectid]

For example, given `ybgin` index on `a int[]` and insert `pk='foo', a={1,3,5}`, write

    [1, 'foo']
    [3, 'foo']
    [5, 'foo']

to the index and

    ['foo'] -> '{1,3,5}'

to the base table.

> ### select

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Select
```

> `amgettuple` is used for `ybgin`, unlike `amgetbitmap` for `gin`.  Since `gin` uses bitmap scan but `ybgin` doesn't, the implementation here is most different.

Reviewer: Extra space in "for `gin`.  Since `gin` uses"

> Given a query, extract the scan keys and entries (reuse code from upstream).  In the simplest case, only one scan key and one scan entry is given, so the query can be like

Reviewer: Extra spaces after each sentence

    basectid := get_from_idx(scan entry)
    return get_from_tab(basectid)

> A more complicated case is one key and two entries where both are required.  We can scan using one entry and recheck the condition afterward.

Reviewer: "We" should not be used

For the first iteration, rechecking the condition is always done, even if it may not be necessary.

> ### delete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Delete
```

> `yb_amdelete` is used.  Upstream postgres doesn't have a delete because it relies on vacuum, but we don't have that, so we need to explicitly write tombstone records.  This is similar to insert.

Reviewer: "we" should not be used

    [scan entry, basectid] -> tombstone

> ### update

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Update
```

> This does a delete then insert.  This may be inefficient for `ybgin` since updating one row can mean multiple deletes and inserts when only a few would have sufficed.

Reviewer 2: Making it a bit more search-engine friendly with the operation name in the first sentence. This is a good pattern to follow wherever you can do it cleanly.
```suggestion
An update operation does a delete then insert. This may be inefficient for `ybgin` since updating one row can mean many deletes and inserts when only a few would have sufficed.
```

Author: Thanks for explaining "why" for the suggestion.

> ## null categories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Null categories
```

For regular indexes and tables, nulls are binary: an item is either null or not.  For GIN, there's more to distinguish, so they are categorized as follows:

> - null key: a null element inside the container (e.g. `ARRAY[null]`)

Reviewer: "e.g." --> "for example"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- null key: a null element inside the container (for example, `ARRAY[null]`)
```

> - empty item: no elements in the container (e.g. `ARRAY[]`)

Reviewer: "e.g." --> "for example"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- empty item: no elements in the container (for example, `ARRAY[]`)
```

> - null item: the container itself is null (i.e. `null`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- null item: the container itself is `null`
```

> DocDB does not support null categories, so we can add a new value type specifically for GIN nulls.  For the first iteration, nulls won't be supported.

Reviewer: No "we"

> DocDB does not support null categories, so we can add a new value type specifically for GIN nulls.  For the first iteration, nulls won't be supported.

Reviewer: "For the first iteration, nulls won't be supported." --> In the current release, nulls are not supported.

Reviewer 2: Only if the first iteration is actually released :)

> ## search modes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Search modes
```

> For regular indexes, there are scan flags like `SK_SEARCHISNULL` and `SK_SEARCHARRAY`.  For GIN, there are search modes:

Reviewer: "like" --> "such as"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For regular indexes, there are scan flags such as `SK_SEARCHISNULL` and `SK_SEARCHARRAY`.  For GIN, there are search modes:
```

- include empty: also match `GIN_CAT_EMPTY_ITEM`
- all: match everything but `GIN_CAT_NULL_ITEM`
- everything: match everything

> ## multicolumn

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Multicolumn
```

> 

Reviewer: "Multicolumn will be disabled in the near-term." --> "Multicolumn are currently disabled."

> Multicolumn will be disabled in the near-term.  Design is TODO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multicolumn is not implemented, and the design is forthcoming.
```

## fastupdate

> Upstream postgres has a default option called "fastupdate" that writes rows to a buffer (called pending list) before flushing to disk for performance purposes.  YB won't do this in the first iteration, and it may never do it at all since, in a multi-node setup, this list needs to be cached on all nodes.  For the first iteration, disallow it.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
Yugabyte does not do this in the current release. Moreover, since in a multi-node setup the list needs to be cached on all nodes, this option may never be supported. It is recommended to disallow it.

Author: I think you missed the point here.  This is not written for end-users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The upstream PostgreSQL "fastupdate" option writes rows to a buffer (called pending list) before flushing to disk for performance purposes. We're not implementing this in the first iteration. Moreover, since in a multi-node setup the list needs to be cached on all nodes, we may never support it.
```

> ## extensions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Extensions
```

> Some extensions extend gin:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some extensions that enhance gin:
```

Reviewer 2: (And in a lot of cases, should "gin" be "GIN"?)

Author: "extend" is better than "enhance" here because the existing feature-set isn't improved but rather more stuff is added.

> - [`btree_gin`][ext-btree-gin]: add opclasses to support ordinary types (no element extraction) so that they can be pseudo-included in gin indexes, which don't allow included columns

Reviewer: Periods are missing at end of sentences.

Reviewer 2: Not necessary provided all bullets in the set are single-sentence or less...
